<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-5" id="chapter-5-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
			<p>Ilderim returned to the douar next day about the third hour. As he dismounted, a man whom he recognized as of his own tribe came to him and said, “O sheik, I was bidden give thee this package, with request that thou read it at once. If there be answer, I was to wait thy pleasure.”</p>
			<p>Ilderim gave the package immediate attention. The seal was already broken. The address ran, <em>To Valerius Gratus at Caesarea.</em></p>
			<p>“Abaddon take him!” growled the sheik, at discovering a letter in Latin.</p>
			<p>Had the missive been in Greek or Arabic, he could have read it; as it was, the utmost he could make out was the signature in bold Roman letters⁠—<b>Messala</b>⁠—whereat his eyes twinkled.</p>
			<p>“Where is the young Jew?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“In the field with the horses,” a servant replied.</p>
			<p>The sheik replaced the papyrus in its envelopes, and, tucking the package under his girdle, remounted the horse. That moment a stranger made his appearance, coming, apparently, from the city.</p>
			<p>“I am looking for Sheik Ilderim, surnamed the Generous,” the stranger said.</p>
			<p>His language and attire bespoke him a Roman.</p>
			<p>What he could not read, he yet could speak; so the old Arab answered, with dignity, “I am Sheik Ilderim.”</p>
			<p>The man’s eyes fell; he raised them again, and said, with forced composure, “I heard you had need of a driver for the games.”</p>
			<p>Ilderim’s lip under the white mustache curled contemptuously.</p>
			<p>“Go thy way,” he said. “I have a driver.”</p>
			<p>He turned to ride away, but the man, lingering, spoke again.</p>
			<p>“Sheik, I am a lover of horses, and they say you have the most beautiful in the world.”</p>
			<p>The old man was touched; he drew rein, as if on the point of yielding to the flattery, but finally replied, “Not today, not today; some other time I will show them to you. I am too busy just now.”</p>
			<p>He rode to the field, while the stranger betook himself to town again with a smiling countenance. He had accomplished his mission.</p>
			<p>And every day thereafter, down to the great day of the games, a man⁠—sometimes two or three men⁠—came to the sheik at the Orchard, pretending to seek an engagement as driver.</p>
			<p>In such manner Messala kept watch over Ben-Hur.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
