<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 28</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-28" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3>
CHAPTER VI
</h3>

<p>
The throes of recovery from drowning are more painful than
the drowning. These Arrius passed through, and, at length,
to Ben-Hur's delight, reached the point of speech.
</p>

<p>
Gradually, from incoherent questions as to where he was, and by
whom and how he had been saved, he reverted to the battle. The doubt
of the victory stimulated his faculties to full return, a result
aided not a little by a long rest--such as could be had on their
frail support. After a while he became talkative.
</p>

<p>
"Our rescue, I see, depends upon the result of the fight. I see
also what thou hast done for me. To speak fairly, thou hast saved my
life at the risk of thy own. I make the acknowledgment broadly; and,
whatever cometh, thou hast my thanks. More than that, if fortune doth
but serve me kindly, and we get well out of this peril, I will do thee
such favor as becometh a Roman who hath power and opportunity to prove
his gratitude. Yet, yet it is to be seen if, with thy good intent,
thou hast really done me a kindness; or, rather, speaking to thy
good-will"--he hesitated--"I would exact of thee a promise to
do me, in a certain event, the greatest favor one man can do
another--and of that let me have thy pledge now."
</p>

<p>
"If the thing be not forbidden, I will do it," Ben-Hur replied.
</p>

<p>
Arrius rested again.
</p>

<p>
"Art thou, indeed, a son of Hur, the Jew?" he next asked.
</p>

<p>
"It is as I have said."
</p>

<p>
"I knew thy father--"
</p>

<p>
Judah drew himself nearer, for the tribune's voice was weak--he
drew nearer, and listened eagerly--at last he thought to hear
of home.
</p>

<p>
"I knew him, and loved him," Arrius continued.
</p>

<p>
There was another pause, during which something diverted the
speaker's thought.
</p>

<p>
"It cannot be," he proceeded, "that thou, a son of his, hast not
heard of Cato and Brutus. They were very great men, and never as
great as in death. In their dying, they left this law--A Roman
may not survive his good-fortune. Art thou listening?"
</p>

<p>
"I hear."
</p>

<p>
"It is a custom of gentlemen in Rome to wear a ring. There is one
on my hand. Take it now."
</p>

<p>
He held the hand to Judah, who did as he asked.
</p>

<p>
"Now put it on thine own hand."
</p>

<p>
Ben-Hur did so.
</p>

<p>
"The trinket hath its uses," said Arrius next. "I have property
and money. I am accounted rich even in Rome. I have no family.
Show the ring to my freedman, who hath control in my absence;
you will find him in a villa near Misenum. Tell him how it came
to thee, and ask anything, or all he may have; he will not refuse
the demand. If I live, I will do better by thee. I will make thee
free, and restore thee to thy home and people; or thou mayst give
thyself to the pursuit that pleaseth thee most. Dost thou hear?"
</p>

<p>
"I could not choose but hear."
</p>

<p>
"Then pledge me. By the gods--"
</p>

<p>
"Nay, good tribune, I am a Jew."
</p>

<p>
"By thy God, then, or in the form most sacred to those of thy
faith--pledge me to do what I tell thee now, and as I tell thee;
I am waiting, let me have thy promise."
</p>

<p>
"Noble Arrius, I am warned by thy manner to expect something of
gravest concern. Tell me thy wish first."
</p>

<p>
"Wilt thou promise then?"
</p>

<p>
"That were to give the pledge, and-- Blessed be the God of my
fathers! yonder cometh a ship!"
</p>

<p>
"In what direction?"
</p>

<p>
"From the north."
</p>

<p>
"Canst thou tell her nationality by outward signs?"
</p>

<p>
"No. My service hath been at the oars."
</p>

<p>
"Hath she a flag?"
</p>

<p>
"I cannot see one."
</p>

<p>
Arrius remained quiet some time, apparently in deep reflection.
</p>

<p>
"Does the ship hold this way yet?" he at length asked.
</p>

<p>
"Still this way."
</p>

<p>
"Look for the flag now."
</p>

<p>
"She hath none."
</p>

<p>
"Nor any other sign?"
</p>

<p>
"She hath a sail set, and is of three banks, and cometh swiftly--that
is all I can say of her."
</p>

<p>
"A Roman in triumph would have out many flags. She must be an enemy.
Hear now," said Arrius, becoming grave again, "hear, while yet I
may speak. If the galley be a pirate, thy life is safe; they may
not give thee freedom; they may put thee to the oar again; but they
will not kill thee. On the other hand, I--"
</p>

<p>
The tribune faltered.
</p>

<p>
"Perpol!" he continued, resolutely. "I am too old to submit to
dishonor. In Rome, let them tell how Quintus Arrius, as became a
Roman tribune, went down with his ship in the midst of the foe.
This is what I would have thee do. If the galley prove a pirate,
push me from the plank and drown me. Dost thou hear? Swear thou
wilt do it."
</p>

<p>
"I will not swear," said Ben-Hur, firmly; "neither will I do the
deed. The Law, which is to me most binding, O tribune, would make
me answerable for thy life. Take back the ring"--he took the seal
from his finger--"take it back, and all thy promises of favor in
the event of delivery from this peril. The judgment which sent me
to the oar for life made me a slave, yet I am not a slave; no more
am I thy freedman. I am a son of Israel, and this moment, at least,
my own master. Take back the ring."
</p>

<p>
Arrius remained passive.
</p>

<p>
"Thou wilt not?" Judah continued. "Not in anger, then, nor in any
despite, but to free myself from a hateful obligation, I will give
thy gift to the sea. See, O tribune!"
</p>

<p>
He tossed the ring away. Arrius heard the splash where it struck
and sank, though he did not look.
</p>

<p>
"Thou hast done a foolish thing," he said; "foolish for one placed
as thou art. I am not dependent upon thee for death. Life is
a thread I can break without thy help; and, if I do, what will
become of thee? Men determined on death prefer it at the hands
of others, for the reason that the soul which Plato giveth us is
rebellious at the thought of self-destruction; that is all. If the
ship be a pirate, I will escape from the world. My mind is fixed.
I am a Roman. Success and honor are all in all. Yet I would have
served thee; thou wouldst not. The ring was the only witness of
my will available in this situation. We are both lost. I will die
regretting the victory and glory wrested from me; thou wilt live
to die a little later, mourning the pious duties undone because
of this folly. I pity thee."
</p>

<p>
Ben-Hur saw the consequences of his act more distinctly than before,
yet he did not falter.
</p>

<p>
"In the three years of my servitude, O tribune, thou wert the first
to look upon me kindly. No, no! There was another." The voice dropped,
the eyes became humid, and he saw plainly as if it were then before
him the face of the boy who helped him to a drink by the old well
at Nazareth. "At least," he proceeded, "thou wert the first to ask
me who I was; and if, when I reached out and caught thee, blind and
sinking the last time, I, too, had thought of the many ways in which
thou couldst be useful to me in my wretchedness, still the act was
not all selfish; this I pray you to believe. Moreover, seeing as
God giveth me to know, the ends I dream of are to be wrought by
fair means alone. As a thing of conscience, I would rather die
with thee than be thy slayer. My mind is firmly set as thine;
though thou wert to offer me all Rome, O tribune, and it belonged
to thee to make the gift good, I would not kill thee. Thy Cato and
Brutus were as little children compared to the Hebrew whose law a
Jew must obey."
</p>

<p>
"But my request. Hast--"
</p>

<p>
"Thy command would be of more weight, and that would not move me.
I have said."
</p>

<p>
Both became silent, waiting.
</p>

<p>
Ben-Hur looked often at the coming ship. Arrius rested with closed
eyes, indifferent.
</p>

<p>
"Art thou sure she is an enemy?" Ben-Hur asked.
</p>

<p>
"I think so," was the reply.
</p>

<p>
"She stops, and puts a boat over the side."
</p>

<p>
"Dost thou see her flag?"
</p>

<p>
"Is there no other sign by which she may be known if Roman?"
</p>

<p>
"If Roman, she hath a helmet over the mast's top."
</p>

<p>
"Then be of cheer. I see the helmet."
</p>

<p>
Still Arrius was not assured.
</p>

<p>
"The men in the small boat are taking in the people afloat.
Pirates are not humane."
</p>

<p>
"They may need rowers," Arrius replied, recurring, possibly,
to times when he had made rescues for the purpose.
</p>

<p>
Ben-Hur was very watchful of the actions of the strangers.
</p>

<p>
"The ship moves off," he said.
</p>

<p>
"Whither?"
</p>

<p>
"Over on our right there is a galley which I take to be deserted.
The new-comer heads towards it. Now she is alongside. Now she is
sending men aboard."
</p>

<p>
Then Arrius opened his eyes and threw off his calm.
</p>

<p>
"Thank thou thy God," he said to Ben-Hur, after a look at the
galleys, "thank thou thy God, as I do my many gods. A pirate would
sink, not save, yon ship. By the act and the helmet on the mast I
know a Roman. The victory is mine. Fortune hath not deserted me.
We are saved. Wave thy hand--call to them--bring them quickly.
I shall be duumvir, and thou! I knew thy father, and loved him.
He was a prince indeed. He taught me a Jew was not a barbarian.
I will take thee with me. I will make thee my son. Give thy God
thanks, and call the sailors. Haste! The pursuit must be kept.
Not a robber shall escape. Hasten them!"
</p>

<p>
Judah raised himself upon the plank, and waved his hand, and called
with all his might; at last he drew the attention of the sailors in
the small boat, and they were speedily taken up.
</p>

<p>
Arrius was received on the galley with all the honors due a hero
so the favorite of Fortune. Upon a couch on the deck he heard the
particulars of the conclusion of the fight. When the survivors afloat
upon the water were all saved and the prize secured, he spread his
flag of commandant anew, and hurried northward to rejoin the fleet
and perfect the victory. In due time the fifty vessels coming down
the channel closed in upon the fugitive pirates, and crushed
them utterly; not one escaped. To swell the tribune's glory,
twenty galleys of the enemy were captured.
</p>

<p>
Upon his return from the cruise, Arrius had warm welcome on the
mole at Misenum. The young man attending him very early attracted
the attention of his friends there; and to their questions as to
who he was the tribune proceeded in the most affectionate manner
to tell the story of his rescue and introduce the stranger,
omitting carefully all that pertained to the latter's previous
history. At the end of the narrative, he called Ben-Hur to him,
and said, with a hand resting affectionately upon his shoulder,
</p>

<p>
"Good friends, this is my son and heir, who, as he is to take my
property--if it be the will of the gods that I leave any--shall
be known to you by my name. I pray you all to love him as you
love me."
</p>

<p>
Speedily as opportunity permitted, the adoption was formally perfected.
And in such manner the brave Roman kept his faith with Ben-Hur,
giving him happy introduction into the imperial world. The month
succeeding Arrius's return, the armilustrium was celebrated with
the utmost magnificence in the theater of Scaurus. One side of
the structure was taken up with military trophies; among which
by far the most conspicuous and most admired were twenty prows,
complemented by their corresponding aplustra, cut bodily from as
many galleys; and over them, so as to be legible to the eighty thousand
spectators in the seats, was this inscription:
</p>

<h4 align="center">
  ----------------------------------------------<br/>
  TAKEN FROM THE PIRATES IN THE GULF OF EURIPUS,<br/>
                        BY<br/>
                  QUINTUS ARRIUS,<br/>
                     DUUMVIR.<br/>
  ----------------------------------------------<br/>
</h4>

		</section>
	</body>
</html>
